---
layout: post
title:  "Operator dashboard for controlling the NeIC Sensitive Data Archive"
date:   2023-04-06
tags: BH22EU
doi: 10.37044/osf.io/nstjb
authors:
  - name: Johan Viklund
  - name: Stefan Negru
  - name: Silva Bahena
  - name: Dimitrios Bampalikis
    orcid: 0000-0002-2078-3079
  - name: Joshua Baskaran
  - name: Marcos Casado Barbero
  - name: Betül Eren Keskin
  - name: Shreyas Shivakumara
europepmc: PPR642149
---

Human genome and phenome data is classified as special categories data under the EU GDPR legislation (Art. 9 GDPR). This requires special care to be taken when processing and reusing this data for research. To enable this in a compliant way, a federated approach was applied to the existing European Genome-phenome Archive ([EGA(https://ega-archive.org/)]) (Freeberg et al., 2022), creating the Federated EGA ([FEGA(https://ega-archive.github.io/ FEGA-onboarding/#what-is-federated-ega)]) (EGA Consortium, n.d.) in 2022. The Nordic countries, Norway, Finland and Sweden, together with Spain and Germany, represent the first federated partners.In the Nordics we have collaborated around our own implementation for our federated EGA nodes. We have done this under the umbrella of the Nordic e-Infrastructure Collaboration (NeIC)[https://neic.no/] (NeIC, n.d.), where we have had three projects over the last 7 years: Tryggve1 (NeIC, 2014-2017), Tryggve2 (NeIC, 2017-2020) and now Heilsa (NeIC, 2021-2024).As we in the nordics now move into production there is a need for both system administrators and helpdesk staff to be able to control and inspect the system. We need to answer questions related to operations, identify errors in order to better manage the services and infrastructure. To standardize this workflow and make the system easier to use, we decided to build a Minimal Viable Product (MVP) for such an “Operator Dashboard” during the ELIXIR Biohackathon 2022.

