---
layout: post
title:  "Oncomatch- Optimizing Oncology Combination Therapy Prediction"
date:   2025-06-30
tags: BITWH25
doi: 10.37044/osf.io/vtq5f_v1
authors:
  - name: Shelby Kroeger
    orcid: 0009-0009-1343-299X
  - name: Lisa Boatner
  - name: Manasi Ghogare
  - name: Stanisław Giziński
  - name: Ben Busby
    orcid: 0000-0001-5267-4988
europepmc: PPR1044434
---

Advances in precision medicine are reshaping cancer treatment by tailoring therapies to a patient’s specific genetic profile. Despite this,
matching cancer mutations to effective drugs remains a complex task due to variability in mutations across cancer types and limited tools
for practical clinical application. In this project, initially developed during the BioIT Hackathon2025, we created OncoMatch—an
open-data-powered web application designed to bridge thisgap by integrating genomic, transcriptomic, proteomic, and drug-target
interaction data tosupport therapy selection.Building on prior work in colorectal cancer, we expanded our scope to include bladder,
ovarian,and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), using the COSMIC and DrugCentral databasesto identify relevant gene mutations and
therapeutics. We developed two novel scoringsystems—the Cancer Precision Score (CPS) and Gene Precision Score (GPS)—to evaluatedrug
specificity and potential effectiveness. Using data from DrugCentral, LINCS L1000,and DeepCoverMOA, we created a unified bioactivity
dataset for over 4,000 drugs, including measures such as IC50 and Kd values.The OncoMatch platform features interactive tools to
visualize drug bioactivity, assess multiomic and structural similarity among compounds, and explore potential drug combinations.
Users can query drugs by cancer type and gene mutation, generating insights into the mostpromising therapies and alternatives.
Our open source approach not only democratizes access to high quality bioinformatics tools but also encourages data driven, personalized
cancer care. Future directions include refining subtype level predictions and improving the platform’s utility for combinatorial therapy
planning. We have developed a streamlit app to make it easy to access this data. That app can be
found at https://oncomatchapp-precision-medicine.streamlit.app.

