---
layout: post
title:  "AI in Practice: Insights from a Community Survey of Biohackathon Participants"
date:   2025-10-12
tags: BH25JP
doi: 10.37044/osf.io/pza7v_v1
authors:
  - name: Lucas Feriau
  - name: Nattawet Sriwichai
    orcid: 0000-0002-5844-4689
  - name: Pumipat Tongyoo
    orcid: 0000-0002-3274-5475
  - name: Susumu Goto
  - name: Yukiko Noda
  - name: Hikaru Gyoji
  - name: Julie Koblitz
    orcid: 0000-0002-7260-2129
  - name: Pipiporn Noisagul
    orcid: 0000-0001-5351-9998
  - name: David Steinberg
    orcid: 0000-0001-6683-2270
  - name: Chatarin Wangsanuwat
    orcid: 0000-0001-8228-2387
wikidata: Q136482088
europepmc: PPR1100304
---

Understanding the practical application of artificial intelligence (AI) in research is increasingly
important as it becomes embedded in life sciences and bioinformatics. This paper reports on
a multilingual survey, developed through community discussions at the 2025 BioHackathon
in Japan and distributed through its networks, to capture current practices, successes, and
challenges in AI adoption. The survey, oﬀered in English, Japanese, and Thai, received 105
responses spanning diverse demographics, regions, and professional backgrounds. Findings
reveal that most participants are frequent AI users, with tools like ChatGPT, Gemini, and
Claude widely adopted, with ChatGPT as number one response. AI is primarily used to assist
or draft tasks in coding, research, and writing, while full task automation remains uncommon,
reflecting a preference for AI as a collaborative aid rather than a replacement. Successes
were noted in eﬃciency, coding support, and proposal writing, whereas challenges centered
on accuracy and reliability. Institutional support emerged as a key factor: respondents in
Japan, Thailand, and the private sector reported stronger support and higher satisfaction than
English-speaking or academic counterparts. By documenting real-world practices and concerns,
this survey provides a valuable community-driven resource to guide responsible AI development
and foster international collaboration in bioinformatics.

