---
layout: post
title:  "Decoding Complex Genotype-Phenotype Interactions by Discretizing the Genome"
date:   2025-12-17
tags: BioHackEU25
doi: 10.37044/osf.io/xhkc3_v1
authors:
  - name: Jędrzej Kubica
    orcid: 0000-0001-7037-3900
  - name: Hetvi Jethwani
    orcid: 0000-0003-1654-4988
  - name: Krzysztof H. Banecki
    orcid: 0000-0001-9573-0804
  - name: Mauricio Moldes
    orcid: 0000-0001-5455-7769
  - name: Dariusz Plewczynski
    orcid: 0000-0002-3840-7610
  - name: Ben Busby
    orcid: 0000-0001-5267-4988
---

Background: Despite the ease and affordability of genome sequencing in biomedical research, the genetic causes of many diseases
or their subtypes remain unknown due to diverse biological mechanisms that complicate genotype-phenotype relationships. Most
previous studies have focused on single variants or sets of variants presumed to be directly causal for the disease. However,
incomplete penetrance, in which some individuals carry disease-associated variants yet exhibit no phenotype, suggests that
these variants, the genomic background and other secondary factors combine to shape the susceptibility to the disease.

Results: Here, we introduce a new methodology for genotype-phenotype mapping based on genomic hashes, unique representations
of local genomic background. Each hash corresponds to a haplotype-resolved set of variants within one recombination-defined
genomic region (haploblock). We provide a practical guide for using genomic hashes to train machine learning models that link
genomic background and specific variant sets to phenotypic outcomes. We implemented this framework as a ready-to-use
bioinformatics pipeline capable of fast, scalable, hash-based genome comparison. The pipeline is available on GitHub:
https://github.com/collaborativebioinformatics/Haploblock_Clusters_ElixirBH25How it benefits the community: Genomic
hashes offer a computationally efficient framework for large-scale genotype-phenotype mapping. By discretizing the
genome into haploblocks, this approach will facilitate the search for causes of complex phenotypes across the entire
genome and the prediction of precision prevention points and treatments.

