---
layout: post
title:  "BioHackEU25 report: Towards a Robust Validation Service for Data and Metadata in ARC RO-Crates"
date:   2025-12-16
tags: BioHackEU25
doi: 10.37044/osf.io/zah28_v1
authors:
  - name: Eli Chadwick
    orcid: 0000-0002-0035-6475
  - name: Matthijs Brouwer
    orcid: 0000-0001-8183-0484
  - name: Kevin Schneider
    orcid: 0000-0002-2198-5262
  - name: Daniel Arend
    orcid: 0000-0002-2455-5938
  - name: Finn Bacall
    orcid: 0000-0002-0048-3300
  - name: Etienne Bardet
  - name: Sebastian Beier
    orcid: 0000-0002-2177-8781
  - name: Dominik Brilhaus
  - name: Xiaoming Hu
  - name: Emma Le Roy Pardonche
  - name: Timo Mühlhaus
  - name: Stuart Owen
    orcid: /0000-0003-2130-0865
  - name: Cyril Pommier
    orcid: 0000-0002-9040-8733
  - name: Heinrich Lukas Weil
    orcid: 0000-0003-1945-6342
wikidata: Q137438732
europepmc: PPR1134875
---

Robust validation of both research data and its accompanying metadata is essential for ensuring adherence to FAIR principles.
Current approaches often handle these aspects separately, hindering a holistic quality assessment. Building upon previous
BioHackathon work establishing ARCs (Annotated Research Context) as RO-Crates (ARC RO-Crate), we aim to develop and demonstrate
an integrated validation strategy for FAIR digital objects. It distinguishes between validating the metadata descriptor and
the payload data files.For the metadata descriptor, validation will ensure structural and semantic compliance to the base
RO-Crate specification and the ARC-ISA family of RO-Crate profiles, using and extending the RO-Crate validator tool.For the
payload data files, validation targets the actual content, since data files often require domain-specific structural and
value constraints, which requires explicit schema definitions. For this, we will integrate Frictionless for checking data
content against community standards (e.g. MIAPPE, as demonstrated in the HORIZON project AGENT). Crucially, this project
will also explore mechanisms for specifying expected data structures’ requirements within the ARC RO-Crate itself. This
aims to provide a more self-contained description of data, investigating how such internal requirements can be linked to
data validation frameworks, complementing the crate’s metadata validation.The overall goal is to provide a powerful,
holistic validation mechanism for ARC RO-Crates, enhancing their reliability, trustworthiness, and FAIRness. A
MIAPPE-compliant plant phenomics dataset will serve as a use case. This integrated validation approach aims to streamline
quality control for researchers and will be packaged as a deployable microservice, offering broad applicability across
diverse research workflows.
