---
layout: post
title:  "BH25DE report: On the path to machine-actionable training materials"
date:   2026-01-26
tags: BH25DE
doi: 10.37044/osf.io/un6cd_v1
authors:
  - name: Phil Reed
    orcid: 0000-0002-4479-715X
  - name: Nick Juty
    orcid: 0000-0002-2036-8350
  - name: Petra Steiner
    orcid: 0000-0001-8997-2620
  - name: Leyla Jael Castro
    orcid: 0000-0003-3986-0510
  - name: Charles Tapley Hoyt
    orcid: 0000-0003-4423-4370
  - name: Oliver Knodel
    orcid: 0000-0001-8174-7795
  - name: Martin Voigt
    orcid: 0000-0001-5556-838X
  - name: Roman Baum
    orcid: 0000-0001-5246-9351
  - name: Dilfuza Djamalova
    orcid: 0009-0004-7782-2894
  - name: Jacobo Miranda
    orcid: 0009-0005-0673-021X
  - name: Alban Gaignard
    orcid: 0000-0002-3597-8557
europepmc: PPR1147340
---

The fragmentation of training materials across research infrastructures often results in unsustainable resource
duplication and significant barriers to upskilling. This work aims to enable developers to build systems that
effectively discover relevant materials by promoting a federated, FAIR-compliant strategy for open training. The
project operated across three interrelated streams: metadata interoperability, material analysis, and the
definition and representation of learning paths in a machine readable manner.We demonstrated content federation
via the mTeSS-X platform, enabling cross-instance exchange and preparing for future integration with the EOSC
federation. To enhance interoperability, we indexed relevant ontologies and curated semantic crosswalks between
established metadata models, specifically MoDALIA and Schema.org/Bioschemas. These mappings were implemented
within the open-source OERbservatory Python package, providing a facility for exchanging data between platforms
such as DALIA and TeSS. For material analysis, we utilised Large Language Models (LLMs) and explored vectorisation
techniques to calculate similarity, allowing for the identification of related materials and the potential for
future deduplication of records across registries.To address the lack of machine-actionable trajectories across
related or sequential materials, we proposed new Bioschemas profiles specifically for learning paths. By extending
Schema.org types, including Course and Syllabus, we developed a schema that supports modular and linear orderings
of training materials. This model was validated using SPARQL queries on knowledge graphs derived from real-world
examples like the Galaxy Training Network. Such advancements provide a foundation for automated path generation
and improved discoverability within training catalogues, and serves as a use case and strategy with broader
applicability beyond those materials.

